Inō Tadataka (伊能 忠敬, February 11, 1745 - May 17, 1818) was a Japanese surveyor and cartographer. He is known for completing the first map of Japan using modern surveying techniques.
Inō Tadataka was born in the small village of Ozeki in the middle of Kujūkuri beach, in Kazusa Province (in what is now Chiba Prefecture). He was born to the Jimbo family and his childhood name was Sanjirou. His mother died when he was seven and after a somewhat tumultuous childhood (not uncommon at the time), he was adopted (age 17) by the prosperous Inō family of Sawara (now a district of Katori, Chiba), a town in Shimōsa Province. He ran the family business, expanding its sake brewing and rice-trading concerns, until he retired at the age of 49.
Inō Tadataka moved to Edo and became a pupil of astronomer Takahashi Yoshitoki, from whom he learned Western astronomy, geography, and mathematics.
In 1800, after nearly five years of study, the Tokugawa shogunate permitted Inō Tadataka to perform a survey of the country using his own money. This task, which consumed the remaining 17 years of his life, covered the entire coastline and some of the interior of each of the Japanese home islands.
Inō Tadataka reportedly spent 3,736 days making measurements (and traveled 34,913 kilometres), stopping regularly to present the Shogun with maps reflecting his survey's progress. He produced detailed maps (some at a scale of 1:36,000, others at 1:216,000) of select parts of Japan, mostly in Kyūshū and Hokkaidō.
Inō Tadataka's magnum opus, his 1:216,000 map of the entire coastline of Japan, remained unfinished at his death in 1818 but was completed by his surveying team in 1821. An atlas collecting all of his survey work, Dai Nihon Enkai Yochi Zenzu (大日本沿海輿地全図, Maps of Japan's Coastal Area), was published that year.
Inō Tadataka's surveys were done in 10 expeditions. The first survey started on June 11, 1800, and included 5 members. This survey was mainly to begin charting the coast of Hokkaido (where Russian ships had come to open trading houses). This survey was done almost entirely by measuring walking steps and taking astronomical observations. They made it to Bekkai (別海) in far Northeast Hokkaido. In total they walked and surveyed 3,244 km.
Inō Tadataka is celebrated as one of the 'architects' of modern Japan. A museum, dedicated to his memory, was opened in his former home in Sawara, and in 1996 was designated a National Historic Site.